---
layout: retorisch
title: Sacred & secular
Date: 2016-10-01
Slug: 2016-10-01
excerpt: Adrian Willaert & Jacob Clemens non Papa
image: 2016-10-01-willaert-kyrie.jpg
---

On 1 October, _Het Retorisch Kwartet_ will perform a selection of sacred and secular works by [Adrian Willaert](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adrian_Willaert) and [Jacob Clemens non Papa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacob_Clemens_non_Papa).

On 2 October, _Het Retorisch Kwartet_  will perform the same programme at a private concert.

Adriaen Willaert (1490 - 1562) has returned to the spotlight since last Utrecht Early Music Festival. This is indeed a return, as Willaert enjoyed great fame in his own time. He was a master at combining complex compositional techniques with clarity and affect, setting text to music. This was new in his time.

The works of Clemens non Papa (1510 - 1555/56) also illustrate this trend, even more expressively. Clemens was an exceptional figure, famous for his music, but also notorious for his lifestyle. He owes his nickname to the latter: indeed, he was ‘not the Pope’.

With both sacred and secular music by Willaert and Clemens, _Het Retorisch Kwartet_ will perform music that aims for zest, for warm expression, and for a rich life. There is humanism in this music.

* Saturday, 1 October 2016, [Lutherse Kerk](http://luthersekerkalkmaar.nl), Oude Gracht 185-187, 1811CD Alkmaar

Programme:

1. _Un giorno mi prego_ - Adrian Willaert (c. 1490 – 1562)
1. _O bene mio_ - Willaert
1. _Madonna io non lo so perche lo fai_ - Willaert
1. _Vecchie letrose_ - Willaert
1. _Dulces exuviae_ - Willaert
1. _Mirabile mysterium_ - Willaert
1. _O magnum mysterium_ - Willaert
1. _Missa Christus Resurgens - Kyrie_ - Willaert
1. _Pour une, las, j’endure_ - Clemens
1. _Au joly boquet croist la violette_ - Clemens
1. _Crux fidelis_ - Clemens non Papa (c. 1510 – c. 1555)
1. _Missa pro defunctis_ - Clemens
